CLINICAL GUIDELINES FOR DIABETIC COMPLICATIONS (RETINOPATHY, NEPHROPATHY, NEUROPATHY)


--- Page 1 ---
12.
RETINOPATHY,
NEUROPATHY,
AND
FOOT
CARE
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 S261
12. Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee for
Foot Care: Standards of Care in
Diabetes*
Diabetes—2026
Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S261–S276 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S012
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the
ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the compo-
nents of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate
quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes,
an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards
of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of
ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system
for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice
Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who
wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional
.diabetes.org/SOC.
Diabetes is defined by hyperglycemia (1). Chronic hyperglycemia is the best-established
concomitant risk factor associated with microvascular complications (e.g., diabetic reti-
nopathy and neuropathy). Optimizing glycemic management has the beneficial impact
of preventing or delaying microvascular disease in diabetes. For example, the Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Compli-
cations (DCCT/EDIC) study in people with type 1 diabetes showed that the early ben-
*A complete list of members of the American
eficial effects of intensive (A1C ∼7% [∼53 mmol/mol]) versus conventional (A1C ∼9%
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
[∼75 mmol/mol]) therapy on microvascular complications persisted for ∼10 years after for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/
the convergence of A1C levels in the two groups during the EDIC follow-up—a novel 10.2337/dc26-SINT.
concept, termed metabolic memory, in which a period of near-normal glycemia produ- Duality of interest information for each contributor
ces long-term beneficial effects on complications, with such effects persisting even is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.
though subsequent levels of glycemia may have risen (2,3). Many mechanisms Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
may mediate the effects of chronic hyperglycemia on complications, including Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 12.
Retinopathy, neuropathy, and foot care: Standards
glycation, lipoxidation, inflammation, apoptosis, and epigenetic and other intra-
of Care in Diabetes—2026. Diabetes Care 2026;
cellular processes (4).
49(Suppl. 1):S261–S276
© 2025 by the American Diabetes Association.
DIABETIC RETINOPATHY
Readers may use this work for educational,
noncommercial purposes if properly cited and
Recommendations
unaltered. The version of record may be linked
12.1 Implement strategies to help people with diabetes reach glycemic goals at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA
to reduce the risk or slow the progression of diabetic retinopathy. A permission is required to post this work on any
12.2 Implement strategies to help people with diabetes reach blood pres- third-party site or platform. This publication and its
contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or
sure and lipid goals to reduce the risk or slow the progression of diabetic
used for text or data mining, machine learning,
retinopathy. A
or similar technologies without prior written
permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute
this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes
Diabetic retinopathy is a highly specific neurovascular complication of diabetes, with
.org. More information is available at https://
prevalence strongly related to both the duration of diabetes and the level of chronic diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
Downloaded
from
http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S261/848830/dc26s012.pdf
by
guest
on
21
January
2026

--- Page 2 ---
S262 Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026
hyperglycemia (5). Diabetic retinopathy is In contrast, GLP-1 RAs may have ocular people with vision-threatening retinopa-
characterized by microaneursyms in the benefits. For example, several studies have thy may be asymptomatic. Additionally,
earliest stage, followed by retinal hemor- shown an association with GLP-1 RAs and current therapies can not only prevent
rhages and ischemia. In response to ische- lower intraocular pressure (23) as well as a vision loss but also help improve vision
mia, neovascularization can occur; this is reduced risk of glaucoma (24,25). for many individuals. Prompt diagnosis
proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR). At allows triage of people with diabetes and
any point along this spectrum, the retina timely intervention that may prevent vi-
Screening
vasculature can leak fluid (and exudates) sion loss in individuals who are asymptom-
leading to diabetic macular edema (DME). Recommendations atic despite advanced diabetes-related eye
12.3 Adults with type 1 diabetes should
Other ocular complications include vitreous disease.
have an initial dilated and comprehen-
hemorrhage and tractional retinal detach- Diabetic retinopathy screening should
sive eye examination by an ophthal-
ment. Diabetic retinopathy is the most fre- be performed using validated approaches
mologist or optometrist 5 years after
quent cause of new cases of blindness and methodologies. Children and adoles-
among adults aged 20–74 years in high- the onset of diabetes. B cents with type 1 or type 2 diabetes are
income countries (1). Glaucoma and cata- 12.4 People with type 2 diabetes should also at risk for complications and need
racts occur earlier and more frequently in have an initial dilated and comprehen- to be screened for diabetic retinopathy
people with diabetes. sive eye examination by an ophthalmol- (26–28) (see section 14, “Children and
In addition to diabetes duration, fac- ogist or optometrist at the time of the Adolescents”). If diabetic retinopathy is ev-
tors that increase the risk of, or are associ- diabetes diagnosis. B ident on screening, prompt referral to an
ated with, retinopathy include chronic 12.5 If there is no evidence of retinop- ophthalmologist is recommended. Subse-
hyperglycemia (6,7), nephropathy (8), hy- athy from one or more annual eye ex- quent examinations for individuals with
pertension (9), and dyslipidemia (10–12). ams and glycemic indicators are within type 1 or type 2 diabetes are generally
Intensive diabetes management with the the goal range, then screening every repeated annually for individuals without
goal of achieving early and/or subsequent 1–2 years may be considered. If any or with mild retinopathy. Exams every
level of diabetic retinopathy is present, 1–2 years may be cost-effective after one
near-normoglycemia has been shown in
subsequent dilated retinal examinations or more normal eye exams. In a popula-
large prospective randomized studies to
prevent and/or delay the onset and pro- should be repeated at least annually tion with well-managed type 2 diabetes,
gression of diabetic retinopathy, reduce by an ophthalmologist or optometrist. there was little risk of development of sig-
the need for future ocular procedures, If retinopathy is progressing or sight- nificant retinopathy within a 3-year inter-
and potentially improve self-reported vi- threatening, then examinations by an val after a normal examination (29), and
sual function (6,10,13–15). ophthalmologist will be required more less frequent intervals have been found
There are conflicting data on the im- frequently. B in simulated modeling to be potentially
pact of glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor 12.6 Programs that use retinal photog- effective in screening for diabetic retinop-
agonist (GLP-1 RA) treatment on various raphy with remote reading or the use athy in individuals without diabetic reti-
facets of eye health, including development of U.S. Food and Drug Administration– nopathy (30). However, it is important to
of nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neu- approved artificial intelligence algo- adjust screening intervals based on the
presence of specific risk factors for reti-
ropathy, glaucoma, neovascular age-related rithms to improve access to diabetic
nopathy onset and worsening retinopa-
macular degeneration (AMD), and diabetic retinopathy screening are appropriate
thy. More frequent examinations by the
retinopathy progression (16). GLP-1 RAs in- screening strategies for diabetic reti-
ophthalmologist will be required if reti-
cluding liraglutide, semaglutide, and dula- nopathy. Such programs need to pro-
nopathy is progressing or risk factors such
glutide have been shown to be associated vide pathways for timely referral for a
as not meeting glycemic goals, advanced
with a risk of mildly worsening diabetic reti- comprehensive eye examination when
retinopathy, or DME are present.
nopathy in randomized trials (17,18). Fur- indicated. B
Retinal photography with remote read-
ther data from clinical studies with longer 12.7 Counsel individuals of childbear-
ing by experts has great potential to pro-
follow-up purposefully designed for diabetic ing potential with preexisting type 1 or
vide screening services in areas where
retinopathy risk assessment, particularly in- type 2 diabetes who are planning preg-
qualified eye care professionals are not
cluding individuals with established diabetic nancy or who are pregnant on the risk
readily available (31,32). High-quality fun-
retinopathy, are needed. Retinopathy status of development and/or progression of
dus photographs can detect most clinically
should be assessed when glucose-lowering diabetic retinopathy. B
significant diabetic retinopathy. Interpreta-
therapies are intensified, such as those us- 12.8 Individuals with preexisting type 1
tion of the images should be performed by
ing GLP-1 RAs, since rapid reductions in or type 2 diabetes should receive an
a trained eye care professional or reading
A1C have been shown to be associated eye exam before pregnancy as well as
center technician or by artificial intelligence
with a risk of initial worsening of retinopa- in the first trimester and may need to (AI) programs that are U.S. Food and Drug
thy (19). There have been matched cohort be monitored every trimester and for Administration (FDA) approved for this pur-
studies linking GLP-1 RAs with various ocu- 1 year postpartum as indicated by the pose. Retinal photography may also en-
lar complications such as nonarteritic ante- degree of retinopathy. B hance efficiency and reduce costs when
rior ischemic optic neuropathy (20,21) and the expertise of ophthalmologists can be
AMD (22) in people with diabetes, but data Identifying individuals with diabetes- used for more complex examinations and
are limited and further studies are needed. related eye disease is important because for treatment (31,33,34). In-person exams
Downloaded
from
http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S261/848830/dc26s012.pdf
by
guest
on
21
January
2026

--- Page 3 ---
diabetesjournals.org/care Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care S263
are still necessary when the retinal pho- progression of diabetic retinopathy. In a
tographs are of unacceptable quality and systematic review and meta-analysis of Recommendations
for follow-up if abnormalities are de- 18 observational studies of pregnant indi- 12.9 Promptly refer individuals with
tected. Retinal photographs are not a viduals with preexisting type 1 or type 2 any level of diabetic macular edema,
substitute for dilated comprehensive eye diabetes, the prevalence of any diabetic moderate or worse nonproliferative di-
exams, which should be performed at retinopathy and PDR in early pregnancy abetic retinopathy (a precursor of pro-
least initially and at yearly intervals there- was 52.3% and 6.1%, respectively. The liferative diabetic retinopathy [PDR]),
after or more frequently as recommended pooled progression rate per 100 pregnan- or any PDR to an ophthalmologist
by an eye care professional. AI systems cies for new diabetic retinopathy develop- who is knowledgeable and experi-
that detect more than mild diabetic reti- ment was 15.0 (95% CI 9.9–20.8), enced in the management of diabetic
nopathy and DME that have been autho- worsened nonproliferative diabetic reti- retinopathy. A
rized for use by the FDA represent an nopathy was 31.0 (95% CI 23.2–39.2), 12.10 Panretinal laser photocoagula-
alternative to traditional screening ap- pooled sight-threatening progression rate tion therapy is indicated to reduce the
proaches (35). Three AI platforms have from nonproliferative diabetic retinopa- risk of vision loss in individuals with
been approved by the FDA for diabetic thy to PDR was 6.3 (95% CI 3.3–10.0), and high-risk PDR and, in some cases, se-
retinopathy screening and examination: vere nonproliferative diabetic retinop- worsened PDR was 37.0 (95% CI 21.2–
AEYE diagnostic screening technology, or athy. A
54.0), demonstrating that close follow-up
AEYE-DS (AEYE Health); EyeArt AI screening 12.11 Intravitreous injections of anti–
should be maintained during pregnancy
system (Eyenuk); and LumineticsCore, for- vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-
to prevent vision loss (38). In addition,
merly IDx-DR (Digital Diagnostics). These VEGF) are a reasonable alternative to
rapid implementation of intensive glyce-
services are covered by most insurance traditional panretinal laser photocoag-
mic management in the setting of reti-
plans. Prospective multicenter clinical tri- ulation for some individuals with PDR
nopathy may be associated with early
als on diagnostic accuracy have been pub- and also reduce the risk of vision loss
worsening of retinopathy (similar to what
lished for each platform (36). However, in these individuals. A
has been seen with GLP-1 RA therapy in
the benefits and optimal utilization of this 12.12 Intravitreous injections of anti-
nonpregnancy settings), and these indi-
type of screening have yet to be fully de- VEGF are indicated as first-line treat-
viduals may also benefit from more fre-
termined. Results of all screening eye ment for most eyes with diabetic mac-
quent follow-up initially (39).
examinations should be documented and ular edema that involves the foveal
A systematic review and meta-analysis
transmitted to the referring health care center and impairs visual acuity. A
and a randomized controlled trial demon-
professional. 12.13 Macular focal/grid photocoagu-
strate that pregnancy in individuals with
lation and intravitreal injections of cor-
type 1 diabetes may aggravate retinopa-
Type 1 Diabetes ticosteroid are reasonable treatments
thy and threaten vision, especially when
Because retinopathy is estimated to take in eyes with persistent diabetic macu-
glycemic management is suboptimal or
at least 5 years to develop after the onset
lar edema despite previous anti-VEGF
retinopathy severity is advanced at the
of hyperglycemia, people with type 1 dia-
therapy or eyes that are not candi-
time of conception (38,39). Laser photo-
betes should have an initial dilated and
dates for this first-line approach. A
coagulation can minimize the risk of vi-
comprehensive eye examination 5 years
12.14 The presence of retinopathy is
sion loss during pregnancy for individuals
after the diagnosis of diabetes (30).
not a contraindication to aspirin ther-
with high-risk PDR or center-involved
apy for cardioprotection, as aspirin does
DME (39). The use of anti–vascular endo-
Type 2 Diabetes not increase the risk of retinal hemor-
thelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) injections People with type 2 diabetes who may
rhage. A in pregnant individuals may be justified if
have had undiagnosed hyperglycemia for
the potential benefit outweighs the poten-
years and have a significant risk of preva-
lent diabetic retinopathy at the time of tial risk to the fetus and only if clearly indi- Photocoagulation Therapy
diabetes diagnosis should have an initial cated (40). Current anti-VEGF medications Two large trials, the Diabetic Retinopathy
dilated and comprehensive eye examina- have been assigned to pregnancy category Study (DRS) in individuals with PDR and
tion at the time of diagnosis. C by the FDA (animal studies have revealed the Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy
evidence of embryo-fetal toxicity, but there Study (ETDRS) in individuals with macular
Pregnancy are no controlled data in human preg- edema, provide the strongest support for
Individuals who develop gestational diabe- nancy), and caution should be used in the therapeutic benefits of laser photoco-
tes mellitus do not require eye examina- pregnant individuals with diabetes because agulation therapy. The DRS (41) showed
tions during pregnancy, since they do not of theoretical risks to the vasculature of that panretinal photocoagulation reduced
appear to be at increased risk of develop- the developing fetus. the risk of severe vision loss from PDR
ing diabetic retinopathy during pregnancy from 15.9% in untreated eyes to 6.4% in
(37). However, individuals of childbearing Treatment treated eyes with the greatest benefit ra-
potential with preexisting type 1 or type 2 Two of the main motivations for screen- tio in those with more advanced baseline
diabetes who are planning pregnancy ing for diabetic retinopathy are to prevent disease (disc neovascularization or vit-
or who have become pregnant should loss of vision and to intervene with treat- reous hemorrhage). Later, the ETDRS
be counseled on the baseline preva- ment when vision loss can be prevented verified the benefits of panretinal pho-
lence and risk of development and/or or reversed. tocoagulation for high-risk PDR and in
Downloaded
from
http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S261/848830/dc26s012.pdf
by
guest
on
21
January
2026

--- Page 4 ---
S264 Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026
older-onset individuals with severe non- therapy in eyes with clinically significant (55–57). Statins are widely used to reduce
proliferative diabetic retinopathy or less- macular edema (defined as retinal edema the risk of vascular disease, including dia-
than-high-risk PDR (42). Panretinal laser located at or threatening the macular betic retinopathy. Their beneficial role in
photocoagulation is still commonly used center), current data from well-designed type 2 diabetes is well established even
to manage PDR. A macular focal/grid clinical trials demonstrate that intravitreal in individuals with retinopathy at diagnosis.
laser photocoagulation technique was anti-VEGF agents provide more effective In particular, the sight-threatening types of
shown in the ETDRS to be effective in treatment of center-involved DME than retinopathy, including DME and PDR, are
treating eyes with clinically significant mac- monotherapy with laser (47,48). Five anti- reduced with statin use (58). Pioglitazone
ular edema from diabetes (42), but this is VEGF agents currently are used to treat and rosiglitazone treatment might be as-
now largely considered a second-line treat- eyes with center-involved DME, namely, sociated with development or worsening
ment of DME. bevacizumab (used off-label) and the on- of DME, although the evidence is conflict-
label medications ranibizumab, aflibercept ing (59).
Anti-VEGF Treatment (2 mg and 8 mg), brolucizumab, and farici-
Data from the DRCR Retina Network (for- mab (5). A comparative effectiveness study
Visual Rehabilitation
merly the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical demonstrated that aflibercept provides vi-
Recommendations
Research Network) and others demon- sion outcomes superior to those of beva-
12.15 People who experience diabetes-
strate that intravitreal injections of anti- cizumab when eyes have moderate visual
related vision loss should be counseled
VEGF agents are effective at regressing impairment (vision of 20/50 or worse)
on the availability and scope of vision
proliferative disease and lead to noninfe- from DME (49). With ranibizumab and
rehabilitation care and provided, or re-
rior or superior visual acuity outcomes aflibercept, most individuals require ad-
compared with panretinal laser over 2 years ministration of intravitreal therapy with ferred for, a comprehensive evaluation
of follow-up (43,44). In addition, it was ob- anti-VEGF agents every 4–8 weeks dur- of their visual impairment by a practi-
served that individuals treated with ranibi- ing the first 12 months of treatment, tioner experienced in vision rehabilita-
zumab tended to have less peripheral with fewer injections needed in subse- tion. E
visual field loss, fewer vitrectomy surgeries quent years to maintain remission from 12.16 People with diabetes-related vi-
for secondary complications from their pro- center-involved DME. The more recently sion loss should receive educational
liferative disease, and a lower risk of de- approved medications faricimab and afli- materials and resources for eye care
veloping DME (43). However, a potential bercept 8 mg can achieve visual acuity support in addition to self-management
drawback in using anti-VEGF therapy to and anatomic gains similar to those of education (e.g., glycemic management
manage proliferative disease is that indi- aflibercept 2 mg with adjustable dosing and hypoglycemia awareness). E
viduals were required to have a greater up to every 16 weeks (50,51). For eyes
number of visits and received a greater that have good vision (20/25 or better)
In the U.S., ∼12% of adults with diabetes
number of treatments than is typically re- despite DME, close monitoring with initia-
have some level of vision impairment
quired for management by panretinal la- tion of anti-VEGF therapy if vision worsens
(60). They may have difficulty reaching
ser, which may not be optimal for some provides 2-year vision outcomes similar to
their diabetes treatment goals and per-
individuals. Additionally, unlike panretinal those of immediate initiation of anti-VEGF
forming many other activities of daily liv-
laser, anti-VEGF therapy requires partici- therapy (52).
ing, which can lead to depression, anxiety,
pation in scheduled follow-up. Individuals Eyes that have persistent DME despite
social isolation, and difficulties at home,
with nonintentional lapses in treatment anti-VEGF treatment may benefit from
in the workplace, or at school (61).
are at risk for worse visual acuity and ana- macular laser photocoagulation or intra-
People with diabetes are at increased
tomic outcomes (45). Subsequently, there vitreal therapy with corticosteroids (53).
risk of chronic vision loss, subsequent
is variability in treatment patterns among Both of these therapies are also reason-
functional decline, and resulting disability.
eye specialists, with treatment plans tai- able first-line approaches for individuals
Vision impairment has physical, psycho-
lored to the individual person. who are not candidates for anti-VEGF treat-
logical, behavioral, and social consequen-
The FDA has approved aflibercept and ment due to systemic considerations such
ces that affect people with diabetes, their
ranibizumab for the treatment of eyes as pregnancy.
families, friends, and caregivers. Health
with diabetic retinopathy. Other emerging
care professionals and stakeholders may not
therapies for retinopathy that may use Adjunctive Therapy
be aware of the overall impact of vision loss
sustained intravitreal delivery of pharma- Lowering blood pressure has been shown
on an individual’s health and well-being.
cologic agents are currently under investi- to decrease retinopathy progression, al-
People with diabetes-related vision loss
gation. Anti-VEGF treatment of eyes with though strict goals (systolic blood pressure
should be evaluated to determine their po-
nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy has <120 mmHg) do not impart additional ben-
tential to benefit from comprehensive vision
been demonstrated to reduce subsequent efit (10). The presence of retinopathy is not
restoration. Vision rehabilitation can help
development of retinal neovascularization a contraindication to aspirin therapy for
people with vision loss achieve maximum
and DME but has not been shown to im- cardioprotection, as aspirin does not in-
function, independence, and quality of life.
prove visual outcomes over 2 years of crease the risk of retinal hemorrhage
therapy and therefore has not been (54). In individuals with dyslipidemia, reti-
widely adopted for this indication (46). nopathy progression may be slowed by NEUROPATHY
While the ETDRS (42) established the the addition of fenofibrate, particularly Diabetic neuropathies are a heterogeneous
benefit of focal laser photocoagulation with early diabetic retinopathy at baseline group of disorders with diverse clinical
Downloaded
from
http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S261/848830/dc26s012.pdf
by
guest
on
21
January
2026

--- Page 5 ---
diabetesjournals.org/care Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care S265
manifestations (4). The early recognition those treated chronically with metformin)
with evidence of other microvascular
and appropriate management of neurop- and other nutritional deficiencies (e.g., ac-
complications, particularly kidney dis-
athy in people with diabetes is important quired copper deficiency after metabolic
ease and diabetic peripheral neuropa-
(62). Points to be aware of include the surgery), hypothyroidism, kidney disease,
thy. Screening can include asking about
following: malignancies (e.g., multiple myeloma, bron-
orthostatic dizziness, syncope, early sa-
chogenic carcinoma), infections (e.g., HIV,
tiety, erectile dysfunction, changes in
1. Diabetic neuropathy is a diagnosis of sweating patterns, or dry cracked skin in hepatitis C), chronic inflammatory de-
exclusion. Nondiabetic neuropathies the extremities. Signs of autonomic neu- myelinating neuropathy, inherited neu-
may be present in people with diabe- ropathy include orthostatic hypotension, ropathies, and vasculitis (67). See the
tes and may be treatable. a resting tachycardia, or evidence of pe- American Diabetes Association position
2. Up to 50% of diabetic peripheral neu- ripheral dryness or cracking of skin. E statement “Diabetic Neuropathy” for more
ropathy (DPN) cases may be asymp- details (63).
tomatic (63). If not recognized and if
preventive foot care is not imple- Diagnosis Diabetic Autonomic Neuropathy
mented, people with diabetes are at Individuals who have had type 1 diabetes
Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy
risk for injuries as well as diabetic foot Individuals who have had type 1 diabetes for 5 years and all individuals with type 2
ulcers (DFUs) and amputations. DFUs for 5 years and all individuals with type 2 diabetes should be assessed annually for
can be defined as a break of the epi- diabetes should be assessed annually for autonomic neuropathy (63). The symp-
dermis and at least part of the dermis, toms and signs of autonomic neuropathy
DPN using medical history and simple
below the ankle, in a person with should be elicited carefully during the his-
clinical tests (63). Symptoms and signs of
diabetes. Consequences of DFUs include tory and physical examination. Major clin-
DPN vary according to the class of sen-
decline in functional status and reduced ical manifestations of diabetic autonomic
sory fibers involved. The most common
independence with daily activities, de- neuropathy include resting tachycardia,
early symptoms are induced by the in-
creased quality of life, cost of wound orthostatic hypotension, gastroparesis, con-
volvement of small fibers and include
care, infection, hospitalization, lower- stipation, diarrhea, fecal incontinence,
pain and dysesthesia (unpleasant sensa-
extremity amputation, and death. erectile dysfunction, neurogenic bladder,
tions of burning and tingling). The involve-
3. Recognition and treatment of autonomic and sudomotor dysfunction with either
ment of large fibers may cause balance
neuropathy may improve symptoms, re- increased or decreased sweating. Screen-
issues (including falls), numbness, and
duce sequelae, and improve quality of ing for symptoms of autonomic neuropa-
loss of protective sensation (LOPS). LOPS
life (63). Cardiovascular autonomic neu- thy includes asking about symptoms of
is a risk factor for DFU due to predisposi-
ropathy (CAN) can be a serious complica- orthostatic intolerance (dizziness, light-
tion to unrecognized minor trauma. The
tion, as it can exacerbate cardiovascular headedness, or weakness with standing),
following clinical tests may be used to as-
disease and contribute to heart failure syncope, exercise intolerance, constipa-
sess small- and large-fiber function and
and sudden cardiac death (62). tion, diarrhea, urinary retention, urinary
protective sensation:
incontinence, or changes in sweat func-
Screening tion. Further testing can be considered if
1. Small-fiber function: pinprick and tem-
symptoms are present and will depend
Recommendations perature sensation
on the end organ involved but might in-
12.17 All people with diabetes should
2. Large-fiber function: lower-extremity
clude cardiovascular autonomic testing,
be assessed for diabetic peripheral neu-
reflexes, vibration perception, propri-
sweat testing, urodynamic studies, gastric
ropathy starting at diagnosis of type 2
oception, and 10-g monofilament emptying, endoscopy or colonoscopy. Im-
diabetes and 5 years after the diagnosis 3. Protective sensation: 10-g monofila-
paired counterregulatory responses to hy-
of type 1 diabetes and at least annually
ment, Ipswich touch test (64,65)
poglycemia in type 1 and type 2 diabetes
thereafter. B
can lead to impaired hypoglycemia aware-
12.18 Assessment for distal symmetric
These tests not only screen for the
ness but are not directly linked to auto-
polyneuropathy should include a careful
presence of dysfunction but also predict nomic neuropathy.
history and assessment of either temper-
future risk of complications. Electrophysi-
ature or pinprick sensation (small-fiber
ological testing, magnetic resonance im-
Cardiovascular Autonomic Neuropathy
function) and vibration sensation using
aging (MRI) scan of the spine (66), or CAN is associated with mortality indepen-
a 128-Hz tuning fork (large-fiber func-
referral to a neurologist is rarely needed, dent of other cardiovascular risk factors
tion). All people with diabetes should
except in situations where the clinical (68,69). In its early stages, CAN may be
have annual 10-g monofilament testing
features are atypical (acute or subacute completely asymptomatic and detected
to identify feet at risk for ulceration
presentation, non–length dependent, asym- only by decreased heart rate variability
and amputation. B
metric, and/or motor involvement) or the with deep breathing. Advanced disease
12.19 Symptoms and signs of auto-
diagnosis is unclear. may be associated with resting tachycar-
nomic neuropathy should be assessed
In all people with diabetes and DPN, dia (>100 bpm) and orthostatic hypoten-
in people with diabetes starting at di-
causes of neuropathy other than diabetes sion (a fall in systolic or diastolic blood
agnosis of type 2 diabetes and 5 years
should be considered, including toxins pressure by >20 mmHg or >10 mmHg,
after the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes,
(e.g., alcohol), neurotoxic medications (e.g., respectively, upon standing without an
and at least annually thereafter, and
chemotherapy), vitamin B12 (especially in appropriate increase in heart rate).
Downloaded
from
http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S261/848830/dc26s012.pdf
by
guest
on
21
January
2026
